# Giants

So many eons, slept away while the universe wound down around him. He's
dead to human eyes. Even the machines barely see the chemistry ticking
over in those cells: an ancient molecule of hydrogen sulphide, frozen in
a hemoglobin embrace; an electron shuttled sluggishly down some
metabolic pathway two weeks ago. Back on Earth there used to be life
deep in the rocks, halfway to the mantle; empires rose and fell in the
time it took those microbes to draw breath. Next to Hakim's, their lives
blurred past in an eyeblink. (Next to all of ours. I was every bit as
dead, just a week ago.)

I'm still not sure it's a good idea, bringing him back.

Flat lines shiver in their endless march along the x-axis: molecules
starting to bump against each other, core temp edging up a fraction of a
fraction. A lonely spark flickers in the hypothalamus; another wriggles
across the prefrontal cortex (a passing thought, millennia past its
best-before, released from amber). Millivolts trickle down some random
path and an eyelid twitches.

The body shudders, tries to breathe but it's too soon: it's still anoxic
in there, pure H₂S gumming up the works and shutting the machinery of
life down to a whisper. The Chimp starts a nitrox flush; swarms of
fireflies bloom across *Pulmonary* and *Vascular.* Hakim's cold empty
husk fills with light from the inside out: red and yellow isotherms,
pulsing arteries, a trillion reawakening neurons stippling across the
translucent avatar in my head. A real breath this time. Another. His
fingers twitch and stutter, tap a random tattoo against the floor of his
sarcophagus.

The lid slides open. His eyes, too, a moment later: they roll unfocused
in their sockets, suffused in a haze of resurrection dementia. He can't
see me. He sees soft lights and vague shadows, hears the faint
underwater echo of nearby machinery, but his mind is still stuck to the
past and the present hasn't sunk in yet.

A tongue dry as leather flicks into view against his upper lip. A
drinking tube emerges from its burrow and nudges Hakim's cheek. His
takes it in his mouth and nurses, reflexive as a newborn.

I lean into what passes for his field of view: "Lazarus, come forth."

It anchors him. I see sudden focus resolving in those eyes, see the past
welling up behind them. I see memories and hearsay loading in the wake
of my voice. Confusion evaporates; something sharper takes its place.
Hakim stares up at me from the grave, his eyes hard as obsidian.

"You asshole," he says. "I can't believe we haven't killed you yet."

### \* \* \*

I give him space. I retreat to the forest, wander endless twilit caverns
while he learns to live again. Down here I can barely see my own hand in
front of my face: gray fingers, faint sapphire accents. Photophores
glimmer around me like dim constellations, each tiny star lit by the
glow of a trillion microbes. Photosynthesis instead of fusion. You can't
get truly lost in *Eriophora*---the Chimp always knows where you
are---but here in the dark, there's comfort to be had in the illusion.

Eventually, though, I have to stop stalling. I sample myriad feeds as I
rise though the depths of the asteroid, find Hakim in the starboard
bridge. I watch as he enters painstaking questions, processes answers,
piles each new piece on top of the last in a rickety climb to insight.
Lots of debris in this system, yes: more than enough material for a
build. Call up the transponders and---what's this? No in-system
scaffolding, no half-constructed jump gate, no asteroid mining or
factory fleet. So why---?

System dynamics, now. Lagrange points. Nothing on this side, anyway,
even though there are at least three planetary bodies in---whoa, those
*orbits*---

*Our* orbit . . .

By the time I join him in the flesh he's motionless, staring into the
tac tank. A bright dimensionless point floats in the center of that
display: *Eriophora.* The ice giant looms dark and massive to port, the
red one---orders of magnitude larger---seethes in the distance behind.
(If I stepped outside I'd see an incandescent barrier stretching across
half the universe, with the barest hint of a curve on the horizon; tac
reduces it to a cherry globe floating in an aquarium.) A million bits of
detritus, from planets to pebbles, careen through the neighborhood.
We're not even relativistic and still the Chimp hasn't had time to tag
them all.

None of those tags make sense anyway. We're aeons from the nearest
earthly constellation; every alphabet, every astronomical convention has
been exhausted by the stars we've passed in the meantime. Maybe the
Chimp invented his own taxonomy while we were sleeping, some arcane
gibberish of hex and ASCII that makes sense to him and him alone. A
hobby, perhaps, although he's supposed to be too stupid for anything
like that.

I slept through most of that scenery. I've been awake for barely a
hundred builds; *my* mythological reservoir is nowhere near exhausted. I
have my own names for these monsters.

The cold giant is Thule. The hot one is Surtr.

Hakim ignores my arrival. He moves sliders back and forth: trajectories
extrude from bodies in motion, predict the future according to Newton.
Eventually all those threads converge and he rewinds time, reverses
entropy, reassembles the shattered teacup and sets it running again. He
does it three times as I watch. The result never changes.

He turns, his face bloodless. "We're going to hit. We're going to ram
straight into the fucking thing."

I swallow and nod.

"That's how it starts," I tell him.

### \* \* \*

We're going to hit. We're *aiming* to hit, we're going to let the lesser
monster devour us before the greater one devours it. We'll lower
*Eriophora* by her own bootstraps, sink through roiling bands of
hydrogen and helium and a thousand exotic hydrocarbons, down to whatever
residual deep-space chill Thule's been hoarding since---who knows? Maybe
almost as long as *we've* been in flight.

It won't last, of course. The planet's been warming ever since it
started its long fall from the long dark. Its bones will survive the
passage through the stellar envelope easily enough: five hours in and
out, give or take. Its atmosphere won't be so lucky, though. Every step
of the way Surtr's going to be stripping it down like a child licking an
ice cream cone.

We'll make it through by balancing in the ever-shrinking sweet spot
between a red-hot sky and the pressure cooker at Thule's core. The
numbers say it'll work.

Hakim should know this already. He would have *awakened* knowing if not
for that idiotic uprising of theirs. But they chose to blind themselves
instead, burn out their links, cut themselves off from the very heart of
the mission. So now I have to *explain* things. I have to *show* things.
All that instantaneous insight we once shared, gone: one ancient fit of
pique and I have to use *words,* scribble out *diagrams,* etch out
painstaking codes and tokens while the clock runs down. I'd hoped that
maybe, after all these red-shifted millennia, they might have
reconsidered; but the look in Hakim's eyes leaves no doubt. As far as
he's concerned it all happened yesterday.

I do my best. I keep the conversation strictly professional, focus on
the story so far: a build, aborted. Chaos and inertia, imminent
annihilation, the insane counterintuitive necessity of passing *through*
a star instead of going *around* it. "What are we doing here?" Hakim
asks once I've finished.

"It looked like a perfect spot." I gesture at the tank. "From a
distance. Chimp even sent out the vons, but---" I shrug. "The closer we
got, the worse it turned out to be."

He stares at me without speaking, so I add context: "Far as we can tell
something big came through a few hundred thousand years back, knocked
everything haywire. None of the planetary masses are even on the
ecliptic any more. We can't find anything orbiting with an eccentricity
of less than point six, there's a shitload of rogues zipping around in
the halo---but by the time those numbers came back, we were already
committed. So now we just buckle down through the heavy traffic, steal a
gravity-assist, get back on the road."

He shakes his head. "What are we doing here?"

Oh, *that's* what he means. I tap an interface, timelapse the red giant.
It jerks in the tank like a fibrillating heart. "Turns out it's an
irregular variable. One complication too many, right?" Not that we'll be
able thread the needle any better than the Chimp can (although of course
Hakim's going to try, in these few hours left to him). But the mission
has parameters. The Chimp has his algorithms. Too many unexpected
variables and he wakes up the meat. That's what we're here for, after
all.

That's *all* we're here for.

One more time, Hakim asks: "What are *we* doing here?"

Oh.

"You're the numbers guy," I say after a moment. "One of 'em, anyway."
Out of how many thousand, stored down in the crypt?

Doesn't matter. They probably all know about me by now.

"Guess it was just your rotation," I add.

He nods. "And you? You a numbers guy too, now?"

"We come back in pairs," I say softly. "You know that."

"So it just happened to be your rotation as well."

"Look---"

"Nothing to do with your *Chimp* wanting its own personal sock-puppet on
hand to keep an eye on things."

"Fuck, Hakim, what do you want me to say?" I spread my hands. "That he
might want someone on deck who won't try to pull the plug the first
chance they get? You think that's unreasonable, given what happened?"
But he doesn't even know what happened, not first-hand. Hakim wasn't up
when the mutiny went down; someone obviously told him, down through the
epochs. Christ knows how much of what he heard is truth, lies, legend.

A few million years go by and suddenly I'm the bogeyman.

### \* \* \*

We fall towards ice. Ice falls towards fire. Both spill through the link
and spread across the back of my skull in glorious terrifying
first-person. Orders of magnitude aren't empty abstractions in here:
they're life-size, you feel them in your gut. Surtr may be small to a
textbook---at seven million kilometers across, it's barely big enough to
get into the giant's club---but that doesn't mean shit when you meet it
face to face. That's not a star out there: that's the scorching edge of
all creation, that's heat-death incarnate. Its breath stinks of
left-over lithium from the worlds it's *already* devoured. And the dark
blemish marching across its face isn't just a *planet.* It's a melting
hellscape twice the size of Uranus, it's frozen methane and liquid
hydrogen and a core hot and heavy enough to bake diamonds. Already it's
coming apart before my eyes, any moons long since lost, the tattered
remnants of a ring system shredding around it like a rotting halo.
Storms boil across its face; aurorae flicker madly at both poles. A
supercyclone pinwheels at the center of the dark side, fed by turbulent
streamers fleeing from light into shadow. Its stares back at me like the
eye of a blind god.

Meanwhile, Hakim pushes balls around inside an aquarium.

He's been at it for hours: a bright blue marble here, a sullen red
basketball over there, threads of tinsel looping through time and
trajectory like the webbing of some crazed spacefaring spider. Maybe
pull our center of mass to starboard, start gentle then ramp up to max?
Break some rocks on the way, suffer some structural damage but nothing
the drones won't be able to patch up in time for the next build.

No?

Maybe cut smooth and fast into full reverse. *Eri*'s not built for it
but if we keep the vectors dead along the centerline, no turn no torque
just a straight linear one-eighty back out the way we came---

But no.

If only we hadn't already fallen so far down the well. If only we hadn't
slowed down to open the trunk, all these N-bodies wouldn't have been
able to get such a grip on us. But now we're only fast, not fast enough;
we're big but still too small.

Now, the only way out is through.

Hakim's not an idiot. He knows the rules as well as I do. He keeps
trying, though. He'd rather rewrite the laws of physics than trust
himself to the enemy. We'll be deaf and blind in there, after all; the
convulsions of Thule's disintegrating atmosphere will fog our sight at
short range, the roar of Surtr's magnetic field will deafen us in the
long. There'll be no way of telling where we are, nothing but the
Chimp's math to tell us where we should be.

Hakim doesn't see the world like I do. He doesn't like having to take
things on faith.

Now he's getting desperate, blasting chunks off his toy asteroid in an
attempt to reduce its momentum. He hasn't yet considered how that might
impact our radiation shielding once we get back up to speed. He's still
stuck on whether we can scavenge enough in-system debris to patch the
holes on our way out.

"It won't work," I tell him, though I'm wandering deep in the catacombs
half a kilometer from his location. (I'm not spying because he knows I'm
watching. Of course he knows.)

"Won't it now."

"Not enough mass along the escape trajectory, even if the vons *could*
grab it all and get it back in time."

"We don't know how much mass is out there. Haven't plotted it all yet."

He's being deliberately obtuse, but I go along with it; at least we're
talking. "Come on. You don't need to plot every piece of gravel to get a
mass distribution. It won't work. Check with the Chimp if you don't
believe me. He'll tell you."

"It just *has* told me," he says.

I stop walking. I force myself to take a slow breath.

"I'm *linked,* Hakim. Not possessed. It's just an interface."

"It's a corpus callosum."

"I'm just as autonomous as you are."

"Define *I.*"

"I don't---"

"Minds are holograms. Split one in half, you get two. Stitch two
together, you get one. Maybe you were human back before your *upgrade.*
Right now you've got about as much standalone soul as my parietal lobe."

I look back along the vaulted corridor (I suppose the cathedral
architecture might just be coincidence), where the dead sleep stacked on
all sides.

They're much better company like this.

"If that's true," I ask them all, "then how did *you* ever get free?"

Hakim doesn't speak for a moment.

"The day you figure that out," he says, "is the day we lose the war."

### \* \* \*

It's not a war. It's a fucking tantrum. They tried to derail the mission
and the Chimp stopped them. Simple as that, and perfectly predictable.
That's why the engineers made the Chimp so minimalist in the first
place, why the mission isn't run by some transcendent AI with an
eight-dimensional IQ: so that things will *stay* predictable. If my
fellow meat sacks couldn't see it coming, they're more stupid than the
thing they're fighting.

Hakim knows that on some level, of course. He just refuses to believe
it: that he and his buddies got outsmarted by something with half his
synapse count. *The Chimp.* The idiot savant, the artificial stupidity.
The number-cruncher explicitly designed to be so dim that even with half
the lifespan of a universe to play around in, it could never develop its
own agenda.

They just can't believe it beat them in a fair fight.

That's why they need me. I let them tell each other that it cheated. No
way that glorified finger-counter would've won if I hadn't betrayed my
own kind.

This is the nature of my betrayal; I stepped in to save their lives. Not
that their lives were really in danger, of course, no matter what they
say. It was just a strategy. That was predictable too.

I'm sure the Chimp would have turned the air back on before things went
too far.

### \* \* \*

Thule's graduated from world to wall while I wasn't looking: a dark
churning expanse of thunderheads and planet-shredding tornadoes. There's
no sign of Surtr lurking behind, not so much as a faint glow on the
horizon. We huddle in the shadow of the lesser giant and it's almost as
though the greater one has simply gone away.

We're technically in the atmosphere now, a mountain wallowing high above
the clouds with its nose to the stars. You could draw a line from the
hot hydrogen slush of Thule's core through the cold small singularity of
our own, straight out through the gaping conical maw at our bow. Hakim
does just that, in the tac tank. Maybe it makes him feel a little more
in control.

*Eriophora* sticks out her tongue.

You can only see it in X-ray or Hawking, maybe the slightest nimbus of
gamma radiation if you tune the sensors just right. A tiny bridge opens
at the back of *Eri*'s mouth: a hole in spacetime reaching back to the
hole in our heart. Our center of mass smears a little off-center, seeks
some elastic equilibrium between those points. The Chimp nudges the far
point farther and our center follows in its wake. The asteroid tugs
upward, falling after itself; Thule pulls us back. We hang balanced in
the sky while the wormhole's tip edges past the crust, past that abraded
mouth of blue-sanded basalt, out past the forward sensor hoop.

We've never stretched ourselves so thin before. Usually there's no need;
with lightyears and epochs to play in, even the slowest fall brings us
up to speed in plenty of time. We can't go past twenty percent
lightspeed anyway, not without getting cooked by the blueshift. Usually
*Eri* keeps her tongue in her mouth.

Not this time. This time we're just another one of Hakim's holiday
ornaments, dangling from a thread in a hurricane. According to the
Chimp, that thread should hold. There are error bars, though, and not a
lot of empirical observation to hang them on. The database on
singularities nested inside asteroids nested inside incinerating ice
giants is pretty heavy on the handwaving.

And that's just the problem *within* the problem. Atmospheric docking
with a world falling at two hundred kilometers a second is downright
trivial next to predicting Thule's course inside the star: the drag
inflicted by a millionth of a red-hot gram per cubic centimeter, stellar
winds and thermohaline mixing, the deep magnetic torque of fossil
helium. It's tough enough figuring out what "inside" even *means* when
the gradient from vacuum to degenerate matter blurs across three million
kilometers. Depending on your definition we might already be in the damn
thing.

Hakim turns to me as the Chimp lowers us toward the storm. "Maybe we
should wake them up."

"Who?"

"Sunday. Ishmael. All of them."

"You know how many thousands of us are stacked up down there?" *I* know.
Hakim might guess but this traitor knows right down to the last soul,
without checking.

Not that any of them would pat me on the back for that.

"What for?" I ask.

He shrugs. "It's all theory. You know that. We could all be dead in a
day."

"You want to bring them back so they can be awake when they die?"

"So they can---I don't know. Write a poem. Grow a sculpture. Shit, one
or two of them might even be willing to make their peace with *you*
before the end."

"Say we wake them up and we're *not* all dead in day. You've just pushed
our life support three orders of mag past spec."

He rolls his eyes. "Then we put everyone back down again. So it spikes
the CO₂. Nothing the forest won't be able to clear in a few centuries."

I can barely hear the tremor in his voice.

He's scared. That's what this is. He's scared, and he doesn't want to
die alone. And I don't count.

I suppose it's a start.

"Come on. At the very least it'll be a hell of a solstice party."

"Ask the Chimp," I suggest.

His face goes hard. I keep mine blank.

I'm pretty sure he wasn't serious anyway.

### \* \* \*

The depths of the troposphere. The heart of the storm. Cliffs of water
and ammonia billow across our path: airborne oceans shattered down to
droplets, to crystals. They crash into our mountain at the speed of
sound, freeze solid or cascade into space depending on the mood.
Lightning flashes everywhere, stamps my brain stem with half-glimpsed
afterimages: demon faces, and great clawed hands with too many fingers.

Somehow the deck stays solid beneath my feet, unmoved even by the death
throes of a world. I can't entirely suppress my own incredulity; even
anchored by two million tonnes of basalt and a black hole, it seems
impossible that we're not being tossed around like a mote in a wind
tunnel.

I squash the feed and the carnage vanishes, leaving nothing behind but
bots and bulkheads and a ribbon of transparent quartz looking down onto
the factory floor. I kill some time watching the assembly lines boot up
in there, watching maintenance drones gestate in the vacuum past the
viewport. Even best-case there's going to be damage. Cameras blinded by
needles of supersonic ice or sheets of boiling acid. The whiskers of
long-range antennae, drooping in the heat. Depending on the breaks it
could take an army to repair the damage after we complete our passage. I
take some comfort from the sight of the Chimp's troops assembling
themselves.

For an instant I think I hear a faint shriek down some far-off corridor:
a breach, a decompression? No alarms, though. Probably just one of the
roaches skidding around a bend in the corridor, looking for a recharge.

I'm not imagining the beeping in my head, though: Hakim, calling down
from the bridge. "You need to be up here," he says when I open the
channel.

"I'm on the other side of the---"

"*Please,*" he says, and forks me a live feed: one of the bow clusters,
pointing at the sky.

A feature has emerged from the featureless overcast: a bright dimple on
the dark sky, like a finger poking down through the roof of the world.
It's invisible in visible light, hidden by torrents of ammonia and
hydrocarbon hurricanes: but it shimmers in infrared like a rippling
ember.

I have no idea what it is.

I draw an imaginary line through the ends of the wormhole. "It's in line
with our displacement vector."

"No *shit* it's in line. I think the wormhole's---provoking it,
somehow."

It's radiating at over two thousand Kelvin.

"So we're inside the star," I say, and hope Hakim takes it as good news.

If nothing else, it means we're on schedule.

### \* \* \*

We've got so little to go on. We don't know how far we are from the
ceiling: it keeps ablating away above us. We don't know how close we are
to the core: it keeps swelling beneath the easing weight of all this
shedding atmosphere. All we know is that temperature rises overhead and
we descend; pressure rises from beneath and we climb. We're specks in
the belly of some fish in empty mid-ocean, surface and seabed equally
hypothetical. None of our reference points are any more fixed than we
are. The Chimp presents estimates based on gravity and inertia, but even
those are little more than guesses thanks to wormhole corruption of the
local spacetime. We're stretched across the probability wave, waiting
for the box to open so the universe can observe whether we're dead or
alive.

Hakim eyes me from across the tank, his face flickering in the light of
a hundred cam feeds. "Something's wrong. We should be through by now."

He's been saying that for the past hour.

"There's bound to be variability," I remind him. "The model---"

"The model." He manages a short, bitter laugh. "Based on all those
zettabytes we collected the *other* times we hitched a ride through a
red giant. The model's shit. One hiccup in the magnetic field and we
could be going *down* instead of *out.*"

"We're still here."

"That's exactly the problem."

"It's still dark." The atmosphere's still thick enough to keep Surtr's
blinding interior at bay.

"Always darkest before the dawn," Hakim says grimly, and points to that
brightening smudge of infrared overhead.

The Chimp can't explain it, for all the fresh realtime data he stuffs
into his equations. All we know is that whatever it is, it hasn't budged
from our displacement vector and it's getting hotter. Or maybe closer.
It's hard to tell; our senses are hazy that far out, and we're not about
to stick our heads above the clouds for a better view.

Whatever it is, the Chimp doesn't think it's worth worrying about. He
says we're almost through.

### \* \* \*

The storm no longer freezes on impact. It spits and hisses, turns
instantly to steam. Incessant lightning strobes the sky, stop-animates
towering jigsaw monsters of methane and acetylene.

God's mind might look like this, if He were an epileptic.

We get in the way sometimes, block some deific synapse in mid-discharge:
a million volts spike the hull and a patch of basalt turns to slag, or
*Eri* goes blind in another eye. I've lost count of the cameras and
antennae and radar dishes we've already lost. I just add it to the tally
when another facet flares and goes dark at the edge of the collage.

Hakim doesn't. "Play that again," he tells the Chimp. "That feed. Just
before it fratzed."

The last moments of the latest casualty: *Eri's* cratered skin,
outcroppings of half-buried machinery. Lightning flickers in from Stage
Left, stabs a radiator fin halfway to our lumpy horizon. A flash. A
banal and overfamiliar phrase:

No Signal.

"Again," Hakim says. "The strike in the middle distance. Freeze on
that."

Three bolts, caught in the act---and Hakim's onto something, I see now.
There's something different about them, something less---random---than
the fractal bifurcations of more distant lightning. Different color,
too---more of a bluish edge---and smaller. The bolts in the distance are
massive. These things arcing across the crust don't look much thicker
than my own arm.

They converge towards some bright mass just barely out of camera range.

"Static discharge of some kind," I suggest.

"Yeah? What *kind,* exactly?"

I can't see anything similar in the current mosaic, but the bridge
bulkheads only hold so many windows and our surface cams still number in
the thousands. Even my link can't handle that many feeds at once.
"Chimp: any other phenomena like that on the surface?"

"Yes," says the Chimp, and high-grades the display:

Bright meshes swarming over stone and steel. Formations of ball
lightning, *walking* on jagged stilts of electricity. Some kind of flat
flickering plasma, sliding along *Eri*'s crust like a stingray.

"*Shittttt . . . *" Hakim hisses. "Where did *they* come from?"

Our compound eye loses another facet.

"They're targeting the sensors." Hakim's face is ashen.

"They?" Could just be electricity arcing to alloy.

"They're blinding us. Oh Jesus fuck being trapped inside a star isn't
bad enough there's gotta be *hostile aliens* in the bargain."

My eyes flicker to the ceiling pickup. "Chimp, what *are* those things?"

"I don't know. They could be something like Saint Elmo's Fire, or a
buoyant plasma. I can't rule out some sort of maser effect either, but
I'm not detecting any significant microwave emissions."

Another camera goes down. "Lightning bugs," Hakim says, and emits a
hysterical giggle.

"Are they alive?" I wonder.

"Not organically," the Chimp tells me. "I don't know if they'd meet
definitions based on entropy restriction."

No conventional morphology there. Those aren't legs exactly,
they're---transient voltage arcs of some kind. And body shape---if
*body* even applies---seems to be optional and fluid. Auroras bunch up
into sparking balls; balls sprout loops or limbs or just blow away at
Mach 2, vanishing into the storm.

I call up a tactical composite. Huh: clustered distribution. A flock
gathered at the skeletal remains of a long-dead thruster nozzle; another
flickering across an evagineering hutch halfway down the starboard
lateral line. A whole party in *Eri'*s crater-mouth, swarming around our
invisible bootstrap like water circling a drain.

"Holes," Hakim says softly. "Depressions. Hatches."

But something's caught my eye that doesn't involve any of those things,
something unfolding overhead while our other eyes are fixed on the
ground---

"They're trying to get in. That's what they're doing."

A sudden bright smudge in the sky. Then a tear; a hole; the dilating
pupil of some great demonic eye. Dim bloody light floods down across the
battered landscape as a cyclone opens over our heads, wreathed in an
inflammation of lightning.

Surtr's finger stretches down from Hades, visible at last to naked eyes.

"Holy *shit . . . *" Hakim whispers.

It's an incandescent tornado, a pillar of fire. It's outside reaching
in, and if anything short of magic can explain its existence it's not
known to me or the Chimp or the accumulated wisdom of all the
astrophysicists nesting in our archives. It reaches down and touches our
wormhole, just *so.* It *bulges,* as if inflamed by an embedded
splinter; the swollen tip wobbles absurdly for a moment, then
bursts*---*

---and fire gushes down from the heavens in a liquid cascade. The things
beneath scatter fast as forked lightning can carry them; here in the
bridge, the view sparks and dies. From a dozen other viewpoints I see
tongues of soft red plasma splashing across *Eriophora*'s crust.

Some rough alarm whispers *fuck fuck fuck fuck* at my side while *Eri*
feeds me intelligence: something happening back at that lateral hutch.
All those cams are down but there's a pressure surge at the outer hatch
and a rhythmic hissing sound crackles in along the intercom.

Hakim's vanished from the bridge. I hear the soft whine of his roach
receding at full throttle. I duck out into the corridor, grab my own
roach from its socket, follow. There's really no question where he's
headed; I'd know that even if the Chimp hadn't already laid out the map
in my head.

Way back along our starboard flank, something's knocking on the door.

### \* \* \*

He's in the prep compartment by the time I catch up, scrambling into an
EVA suit like some panicky insect trying to climb back into its cocoon.
"Outer hatch is breached," he tells me, forgetting.

Just meters away. Past racks and suit alcoves, just the other side of
that massive biosteel drawbridge, something's looking for a way in. It
could find one, too; I can see heat shimmering off the hatch. I can hear
the pop and crackle of arcing electricity coming through from the other
side, the faint howl of distant hurricanes.

"No weapons." Hakim fumbles with his gauntlets. "Mission to the end of
time and *they don't even give us weapons.*" Which is not entirely true.
They certainly gave us the means to *build* weapons. I don't know if
Hakim ever availed himself of that option but I remember his buddies,
not so far from this very spot. I remember them pointing their weapons
at me.

"What are we doing here?" I gesture at the hatch; is it my imagination,
or has it brightened a little in the center?

He shakes his head, his breathing fast and shallow. "I was gonna---you
know, the welding torches. The lasers. Thought we could stand them off."

All stored on the other side.

He's suited up to the neck. His helmet hangs on its hook within easy
reach: a grab and a twist and he'll be self-contained again. For a
while.

Something pounds hard on the hatch. "Oh shit," Hakim says weakly.

I keep my voice level. "What's the plan?"

He takes a breath, steadies himself. "We, um---we retreat. Out past the
nearest dropgate." The Chimp takes the hint and throws an overlay across
my inner map; back into the corridor and fifteen meters forward.
"Anything breaches, the gates come down." He nods at an alcove. "Grab a
suit, just in---"

"And when they breach the dropgates?" I wonder. The biosteel's
definitely glowing, there in the center.

"The *next* set goes down. Jesus, you know the drill."

"That's your plan? Give up *Eri* in stages?"

"Small stages." He nods and swallows. "Buy time. Figure out their weak
spot." He grabs his helmet and turns towards the corridor.

I lay a restraining hand on his shoulder. "How do we do that, exactly?"

He shrugs it off. "Wing it for fucksake! Get Chimp to customize some
drones to go in and, and ground them or something." He heads for the
door.

This time the hand I lay on him is more than a suggestion. This time it
clamps down, spins him around, pushes him against the bulkhead. His
helmet bounces across the deck. His clumsy gloved hands come up to fend
me off but there's no strength in them. His eyes do a mad little jig in
his face.

"You're not thinking this through," I say, very calmly.

"*There's no* time *to think it through!* They might not even *get* past
the gates, maybe they're not even *trying,* I mean---" His eyes brighten
with faint and ridiculous hope. "Maybe it's not even an attack, I bet
it's not, you know, they're just---they're *dying.* It's the end of the
world and their home's on fire and they're just looking for a place to
hide, they're not looking for a way *in* they're looking for a way
*out*---"

"What makes you think that inside's any less lethal to them than outside
is to us?"

"They don't have to be smart!" he cries out. "They just have to be
scared!"

Fingers of faint electricity flicker and crackle around the edges of the
hatch: heat lightning, maybe. Or maybe something more prehensile.

I keep Hakim pinned. "What if they *are* smart? What if they're not just
burrowing on instinct? What if *they're* the ones with the plan, hmm?"

He spreads his hands. "What else can we do?"

"We don't give them the chance to breach. We get out of here *now.*"

"Get---"

"Ditch the ice giant. Take our chances in the star."

He stops struggling and stares, waiting for the punchline. "You're
insane," he whispers when I fail to deliver.

"Why? Chimp says we're almost through anyway."

"He said that *half an hour ago!* And we were an hour past predicted
exit even *then!*"

"Chimp?" I say, not for the AI's benefit but for Hakim's.

"Right here."

"Say we max the wormhole. Throw out as much mass as we can, shortest
path out of the envelope."

"Tidal stress tears *Eriophora* into two debris clouds of roughly equal
mass, each one centered on---"

"Amend that. Say we optimize distance and displacement to maximize
velocity *without* losing structural integrity."

I can tell by the wait that there are going to be serious confidence
limits attached to the answer. "*Eriophora* is directly exposed to the
stellar envelope for 1300 corsecs," he says at last. "Give or take 450."

At 2300 Kelvin. Basalt melts at 1724.

But the Chimp hasn't finished. "We would also risk significant
structural damage due to the migration of secondary centers-of-mass
beyond *Eriophora's* hardlined displacement channels."

"Do we make it?"

"I don't know."

Hakim throws up his hands. "Why the hell not? It's what you *do*!"

"My models can't account for the plasma invagination overhead or the
electrical events on the hull," the Chimp tells him. "Therefore they're
missing at least one important variable. You can't trust my
predictions."

Down at the end of the compartment, the hatch glows red as the sky.
Electricity sizzles and pops and *grabs.*

"Do it," Hakim says suddenly.

"I need consensus," the Chimp replies.

Of course. The Chimp takes his lead from us meat sacks when he gets
lost; but looking to us for wisdom, he wouldn't know whose to follow if
we disagreed.

Hakim waits, manic, his eyes flicking between me and the hatch. "Well?"
he says after a moment.

It all comes down to me. I could cancel him out.

"What are you waiting for? *It was your fucking idea!*"

I feel an urge to lean close and whisper in his ear. *Not just Chimp's
sock puppet* now*, am I, motherfucker?* I resist it. "Sure," I say
instead. "Give it a shot."

Wheels begin to turn. *Eriophora* trembles and groans, torqued by
vectors she was never designed for. Unfamiliar sensations tickle my
backbrain, move forward, root in my gut: the impossible, indescribable
sense of *down* being in two places at once. One of those places is safe
and familiar, beneath my feet, beneath decks and forests and bedrock at
the very heart of the ship; but the other's getting stronger, and it's
*moving . . .*

I hear the scream of distant metal. I hear the clatter of loose objects
crashing into walls. *Eriophora* lurches, staggers to port, turns
ponderously on some axis spread across too many sickening dimensions.
There's something moving behind the wall, deep in the rocks; I can't see
it but I feel its pull, hear the cracking of new fault lines splitting
ancient stone. A dozen crimson icons bloom like tumors in my brain,
*Subsystem Failure* and *Critical Coolant* and *Primary Channel
Interrupt.* A half-empty squeezebulb, discarded decades or centuries or
millennia ago, wobbles half-levitating into view around the corner. It
falls sideways and slides along the bulkhead, caught up in the
tide-monster's wake.

I'm standing on the deck at forty-five degrees. I think I'm going to be
sick.

The *down* beneath my feet is less than a whisper. I give silent thanks
for superconducting ceramics, piezoelectric trusses, all reinforcements
brute and magical that keep this little worldlet from crumbling to dust
while the Chimp plays havoc with the laws of physics. I offer a diffuse
and desperate prayer that they're up to the task. Then I'm falling
forward, upward, *out*: Hakim and I smack into the forward bulkhead as a
rubber band, stretched to its limit, snaps free and hurls us forward.

Surtr roars in triumph as we emerge, snatches at this tiny unexpected
prize shaken free of the larger one. Jagged spiders leap away and vanish
into blinding fog. Wireframe swirls of magnetic force twist in the heat,
spun off from the dynamo way down in the giant's helium heart---or maybe
that's just the Chimp, feeding me models and imaginings. I'm pretty sure
it's not real; our eyes and ears and fingertips have all been licked
away, our windows all gone dark. Skin and bones will be next to go: warm
basalt, softening down to plastic. Maybe it's happening already. No way
to tell any more. Nothing to do but fall out as the air flattens and
shimmers in the rising heat.

I'm saving your life, Hakim. You better fucking appreciate it.

### \* \* \*

Yeats was wrong. The center held after all.

Now we are only half-blind, and wholly ballistic. A few eyes remain
smoldering on the hull, pitted with cataracts; most are gone entirely.
Charred stumps spark fitfully where sensors used to be. *Eri*'s center
of mass has snapped back into itself and is sleeping off the hangover
down in the basement. We coast on pure inertia, as passive as any other
rock.

But we are through, and we are alive, and we have ten thousand years to
lick our wounds.

It won't take anywhere near that long, of course. The Chimp has already
deployed his army; they burned their way out through the slagged
doorways of a dozen service tunnels, laden with newly refined metals dug
from the heart of the mountain. Now they clamber across the surface like
great metal insects, swapping good parts for bad and cauterizing our
wounds with bright light. Every now and then another dead window
flickers back to life; the universe returns to us in bits and pieces.
Surtr simmers in our wake, still vast but receding, barely hot enough to
boil water this far out.

I prefer the view ahead: deep comforting darkness, swirls of stars,
glittering constellations we'll never see again and can't be bothered to
name. Just passing through.

Hakim should be down in the crypt by now, getting ready to turn in.
Instead I find him back in the starboard bridge, watching fingers of
blue-white lightning leap across the hull. It's a short clip and it
always ends the same way, but he seems to find value in repeat viewings.

He turns at my approach. "Sanduloviciu plasma."

"What?"

"Electrons on the outside, positive ions on the inside. Self-organizing
membranes. Live ball lightning. Although I don't know what they'd use as
a rep code. Some kind of quantum spin liquid, maybe." He shrugs. "The
guys who discovered these things didn't have much to say about
heredity."

He's talking about primitive experiments with gas and electricity, back
in some prehistoric lab from the days before we launched (I know: Chimp
fed me the archive file the moment Hakim accessed it). "*We're* the guys
who discovered them," I point out; the things that clawed at our
doorstep were lightyears beyond anything those cavemen ever put
together.

"No we didn't."

I wait.

"*They* discovered *us,*" he tells me.

I feel a half-smile pulling at the corner of my mouth.

"I keep thinking about the odds," Hakim says. "A system that looks so
right from a distance and turns out to be so wrong after we've committed
to the flyby. All that mass and all those potential trajectories, and
somehow the only way out is through the goddamn star. Oh, and there's
one convenient ice giant that just *happens* to be going our way. Any
idea what those odds are?"

"Astronomical." I keep a straight face.

He shakes his head. "Infinitesimal."

"I've been thinking the same thing," I admit.

Hakim gives me a sharp glance. "Have you now."

"The way the whole system seemed primed to draw us into the star. The
way that thing reached down to grab us once we were inside. Your
*lightning bugs*: I don't think they were native to the planet at all,
not if they were plasma-based."

"You think they were from the star."

I shrug.

"Star aliens," Hakim says.

"Or drones of some kind. Either way, you're right; this system didn't
just happen. It was a sampling transect. A trapline."

"Which makes us what, exactly? Specimens? Pets? Hunting trophies?"

"Almost. Maybe. Who knows?"

"Maybe *buddies,* hmm?"

I glance up at the sudden edge in his voice.

"Maybe just *allies,*" he muses. "In adversity. Because it's all for one
against the common enemy, right?"

"That's generally good strategy." It felt good, too, not being the bad
guy for a change. Being the guy who actually pulled asses *out* of the
fire.

I'll settle for *allies.*

"Because I can see a couple of other coincidences, if I squint." He's
not squinting, though. He's staring straight through me. "Like the way
the Chimp happened to pair me up with the one person on the whole roster
I'd just as soon chuck out an airlock."

"That's hardly a coincidence," I snort. "It'd be next to impossible to
find someone who *didn't*---"

Oh.

The accusation hangs in the air like static electricity. Hakim waits for
my defense.

"You think the Chimp used this situation to---"

"Used," he says, "or *invented.*"

"That's insane. You saw it with your own eyes, you can *still* see---"

"I saw models in a tank. I saw pixels on bulkheads. I never threw on a
suit to go see for myself. You'd have to be suicidal, right?"

He's actually smiling.

"They tried to break in," I remind him.

"Oh, I know *something* was pounding on the door. I'm just not sold on
the idea that it was built by aliens."

"You think this whole thing was some kind of trick?" I shake my head in
disbelief. "We'll have surface access in a couple of weeks. Hell, just
cut a hole into Fab right now, crawl out through one of the service
tunnels. See for yourself."

"See what? A star off the stern?" He shrugs. "Red giants are common as
dirt. Doesn't mean the specs on this system were anywhere near as
restrictive as Chimp says. Doesn't mean we had to go *through,* doesn't
even mean we did. For all I know the Chimp had its bots strafing the
hull with lasers and blowtorches for the past hundred years, slagging
things down to look nice and convincing just in case I *did* pop out for
a look-see." Hakim shakes his head. "All I know is, it's only had one
meat sack in its corner since the mutiny, and he's not much good if no
one will talk to him. But how can you keep hating someone after he's
saved your life?"

It astonishes me, the degree to which people torture reason. Just to
protect their precious preconceptions.

"The weird thing," Hakim adds, almost to himself, "is that it worked."

It takes a moment for that to sink in.

"Because I don't think you were in on it," he explains. \"I don't think
you had a clue. How could you? You're not even a whole person, you're
just a---a glorified subroutine. And subroutines don't question their
inputs. A thought pops into your head, you just assume it's yours. You
believe everything that miserable piece of hardware tells you, because
you don't have a choice. Maybe you never did.

"How can I hate you for that?" he asks.

I don't answer, so he does: "I can't. Not any more. I can only---"

"Shut the fuck up," I say, and turn my back.

He leaves me then, leaves me surrounded by all these pixels and pictures
he refuses to accept. He heads back to the crypt to join his friends.
The sleeping dead. The weak links. Every last one of them would scuttle
the mission, given half a chance.

If it was up to me none of them would ever wake up again. But Chimp
reminds me of the obvious: a mission built for aeons, the impossibility
of anticipating even a fraction of the obstacles we're bound to
encounter. The need for flexibility, for the wet sloppy intelligence
that long-dead engineers excluded from his architecture in the name of
mission stability. Billions of years ahead of us, perhaps, and only a
few thousand meat sacks to deal with the unexpected. There may not be
enough of us as it is.

And yet, with all that vaunted human intellect, Hakim can't see the
obvious. None of them can. I'm not even human to those humans. A
subroutine, he says. A lobe in something else's brain. But I don't need
his fucking pity. He'd realize that if he thought about it for more than
a split-second, if he was willing to examine that mountain of unexamined
assumptions he calls a worldview.

He won't, though. He refuses to look into the mirror long enough to see
what's looking back. He can't even tell the difference between brain and
brawn. The Chimp drives the ship; the Chimp builds the jump gates; the
Chimp runs life support. We try to take the reins of our own destiny and
it's the Chimp who hammers us down.

So the Chimp is in control. The Chimp is always in control; and when
minds merge across this high-bandwidth link in my head, surely it will
be the mech that absorbs the meat.

It astonishes me that he can't see the fallacy. He knows the Chimp's
synapse count as well as I do, but he'd rather fall back on prejudice
than run the numbers.

I'm not the Chimp's subroutine at all.

The Chimp is mine.
