# Hitchhiker

    Eriophora Mission Clock 1,138Tsec

This is the first thing that comes to his mind as his mind begins to
come together: *something is very wrong*.

That mind is still rudimentary, more of the gut than the head. The
ephemeral scratchpad of the conscious self isn't yet big enough to hold
more than this one idea: something is wrong. But time passes and that
vague misgiving grows points and edges, acquires surface detail. It
becomes aware of the reason for its existence:

*Eriophora* is decellerating.

There is something up ahead. A star. A dot. It swells and his mind
swells around it, grows large enough to contain both imagery and
insight. A boulder, a squashed, pockmarked ovoid tumbling with slow
majesty against the stars. A boulder the size of a mountain.

An asteroid, strangely asymmetrical.

The rough curve of its horizon is flattened slightly along one facet, as
if some capricious god dropped by with a belt sander and ground one
cheek to the bone. There's something wrong about the way the object
rolls through the heavens, too: a precessive wobble around some
counterintuitive center of gravity that seems, itself, off-center.

A number pops into his mind, also counterintuitive: this thing is moving
at over six hundred kilometers per second.

Not just an asteroid, then.

A ship.

The details coalesce in his mind as his mind coalesces from oblivion. He
accepts them passively, uncritically: a self not yet fully restored,
processing input as its operating system reboots. Morphometric profile
consistent with UNDA Mobile Factory *Araneus*: Predrive mass 4.3
petagrams, sub-event drive mass 29.2 exagrams. 9243m along the major
axis at launch, 6042m along the minor. Ion and isotope traces on outer
surface consistent with catastrophic outgassing within the past 127–167
terasecs. No transponder signal. Mean ambient thermal emissions 5K.

Derelict.

"How are you feeling?" A familiar voice in the darkness. It brings back
memories he would just as soon forget.

He moves a tongue like old leather. He tries to speak, fails, coughs. A
helpful keyboard appears hovering in the center of his visual field. He
saccades the letters: [Like shit.]{.smallcaps}

At least he knows who he is now. All the pieces have reassembled. He
wishes they hadn't. If he had his druthers he'd go back to oblivion
right now, sleep out eternity until something interesting happened.

He wills himself to decohere. He fails at that, too.

He sighs inwardly. Resigns himself to continued existence.

For the first time in two million years, Viktor Heinwald opens his eyes.

### \* \* \*

Finally he finds his voice: "We had a deal." It sounds like cracking
ice.

The keyboard flickers and disappears. The ceiling beyond arches overhead
in a vague collision of shadows and curves. One of Chimp's omnipresent
cameras watches at the corner of his eye.

The coffin offers him a teat. He sucks gratefully.

"These are exceptional circumstances," Chimp says with a pinch of
synthetic regret. "I need someone I can trust out of my sight."

"You— you want me to board *Araneus*."

"Yes. It is not responding to hails. It should not be here. It is a
mystery."

"So send in the bots."

"I have. They can't function everywhere. I'm reading erratic
high-amplitude voltage spikes in some spots, radiation pockets in
others."

"You want to send me into a place that fries bots." It's a token
grumble, not a refusal. Meat functions just fine under conditions that
would lobotomize electronics in an instant. Just so long as your masters
fix the cellular damage afterward, stitch the genes and glue the
membranes back together before your insides slough out through your
asshole.

"Who else you bring back?" This is obviously more than a one-man job.

"Sierra Solway. Ari Vrooman."

He doesn't know them. "What tribe?"

"There are no tribes."

"I—" But it only makes sense, he realizes. Chimp may not be the smartest
chip on the board but he learns from his mistakes—and what are tribes,
now, but a breeding ground for insurrection?

*Eriophora*'s entire social infrastructure has been dismantled as
Heinwald slept.

Not that he's got anything to complain about. He was the one who wanted
the extended downtimes, after all. Still, he wonders what else has
changed. He wonders what happened to the people who changed it.

"What about the others? Park, and Sunday, and…"

*Oh God, Park. I'm so sorry. If you could only understand; it really was
the right thing to do…*

"We have come to terms," Chimp says.

"You didn't—deprecate them?"

"No. They've been on deck a number of times while you were in stasis."

He's silent for a moment. "I don't suppose they ever...well...talk about
me..."

The Chimp remains silent. The Chimp isn't compelled to respond to
anything that isn't phrased as an explicit question. It would be so easy
to do that: *Do they talk about those days? Do they talk about me?*

*Do they still want me dead?*

Heinwald takes a breath, and rises from the grave.

### \* \* \*

To human eyes *Araneus* is a hole in space: a dark blot against the
stars, its edges in constant flux as jagged topography rises and
subsides across its horizon. Every now and then something glints from
shadow, some surface bit of exposed crystal or alloy bouncing feeble
starlight back into the void—but out here, lightyears from the nearest
star, the omnipresent darkness drowns them the very instant they appear.

To *Eriophora*'s eyes, though, the colors never stop moving.

A concentric rainbow, bands radiating from black to red to coolest
azure, wobbling as the asteroid rotates: *Araneus*'s grav contours,
wrapped around the mad dense heart of the thing. Bright flickering
staccatos of yellow and green, ephemeral as sheet lightning: electrical
discharges, severed nerves, bits of primordial energy not yet bled dry.
A translucent overlay of crags and hillocks—the radar profile, a crunchy
coating of surface terrain rolling into view and disappearing back
around the far side.

"There." Solway points at the shared hallucination in the tac tank and
in their heads, where a dark jagged fissure splits *Araneus*'s flattened
cheek like a crack in a mirror. "That's pure torque. Wormhole must've
opened offside of the Higgs, shear stress did the rest."

"That would explain the skewed ablation," Heinwald guesses. "COG
displaces off the centerline, whole damn rock gets dragged forward at an
angle. Blueshift sandblasts the new leading edge."

"How long would it take to sustain that much wear?" Vrooman lifts his
eyes to the ceiling. "Chimp?"

"That would depend on cruising speed and density of the interstellar
medium along the way. Both will have changed radically over time. I have
no way of estimating those parameters."

"She didn't make it all this way at a measly six hundred kps," Solway
remarks.

Vrooman won't let it go. "Guess, Chimp. Assume current velocity as part
of an asymptotic decline."

"One hundred twenty-six terasecs. No meaningful confidence limits."

"That's bullshit. That's before we even shipped out."

Solway shrugs. "You asked, smart guy. You think he would've even got us
out of bed if he had any answers?"

Obviously these two know each other. Heinwald remembers the same sort of
good-natured bickering from his own past; it's not hard to read the
history behind it.

Not hard to hate them, just a little.

He stamps down on the feeling, on the memory, focuses on the present.
Obviously things changed over time. *Araneus* experienced a period of
high-gee off-kilter acceleration, enough to sand down that surface.
Obviously something put on the brakes. Obviously it's been coasting ever
since.

"Chimp," he says. "Assume a purely inertial trajectory since the
outgassing event. How far would *Araneus* have travelled in that time?"

"Nine thousand five hundred lightyears," Chimp says immediately. "Given
mean travel time of 147 terasecs. Give or take 1,250 lightyears."

"So"—Solway takes a breath—"something pulled the rudder hard right and
held it there until, what. Five million years ago."

"Four point seven." Vrooman says. "Give or take."

She waves off the nitpick. "Until *Araneus* was pointed here. Where we'd
be. Intercept course."

"Uh huh." Heinwald feels small muscles tugging at the corner of his
mouth. "Putting aside for the moment the question of why anyone would do
that, how would they know, five million years ago, where we were going
to be *now*?" It's a hollow challenge, of course. Solway and Vrooman
know the scales and the odds as well as he does. Maybe his words aren't
so much objection as appeal, maybe he's hoping against hope they might
actually have an answer.

Solway shrugs. "What are the odds that in the whole wide galaxy, we just
*happen* to run into each other?"

Evidently not.

An army of probes is already on-site. They broke and entered before
Chimp even got anyone out of bed, forced their way in through corroded
airlocks, slipped though myriad fractures in *Araneus*'s crust. Most of
them are MIA at any given time—the asteroid's mantle blocks any signal
sent from the deeps—but every now and then one breaks the surface,
flash-dumps its findings across the void, resubmerges for further
reconnaissance. So far they've turned up three crypts (two wrecked, one
intact, none with power), a piece of the secondary mass-interface bus,
and a pile of rubble where the starboard lateral bridge used to be. More
corridors and compartments and cul-de-sacs than anyone wants to count.
The collated data float before them, a patchwork *Araneus*-shaped jigsaw
whose pieces materialize at irregular intervals.

And yet huge parts of that puzzle remain stubbornly dark. The map is
full of gaps and tumors: cave-ins, blockages, hatches welded shut by
endless aeons of hard vacuum. Pockets of radiation to fry the most
resilient bot down to the motherboard. Broken circuits, dying but not
yet dead, drawing lethal energy from the singularity that still lurks
indestructibly at the center of the hulk.

"What the hell could have done all this?" Heinwald wonders for the tenth
time.

"I don't know," the Chimp replies with endless patience, "but this could
be significant." He throws a snapshot front and center: rough rock
walls, ground-effect deck plating, a vast heavy hatch blocking the way.
A grainy still image, shot through with static. None of the clarity and
detail that *Eri*'s bots have been serving up to now.

"Where's this from?" Solway wonders.

"Uncertain. I'm trying to derive a fix." The jigsaw fades to
near-transparency: a cluster of tiny crosshairs brighten in its depths,
in one of the dark zones. They dance flickering around each other. "The
image isn't a direct feed," the Chimp reports. "It's a crash-dump from
one bot to another, boosted and retransmitted through the structure."

Solway frowns. "What, without waiting for a clear line-of-sight?"

Vrooman: "Are you in contact with those bots?"

"No." The crosshairs are converging to a common point, not so much
dancing now as jostling, elbow to elbow. "The booster lost contact with
the source immediately after transmitting this image, and the source was
too deep for direct contact. It would not have tried to transmit under
such poor conditions if it expected to encounter better ones. The source
transmitter is likely offline, possibly destroyed."

"Big surprise there," Vrooman grunts. "Whole thing's a hazard. Fucking
death trap whether you're meat *or* machine."

Solway shakes her head. "Ari, It didn't just trip over a wire and
face-plant. It sent that snapshot before it went down, that was the
*last* thing it did. It must have thought it was pretty damned
important."

Evidently Solway is given to anthropomorphism. Bots don't nobly
sacrifice their lives to send vital intel back to HQ with their dying
breath. Still, she's not exactly wrong. It's safe to say that
transmitting even this crappy image must have maximized whatever state
variable the bot considered paramount at the time.

"Chimp, can you clean up that snapshot at all?" Heinwald asks.

"Yes. Just a moment."

The crosshairs have finally converged: a point about halfway to the
core, maybe 0.8 gees down. According to the fleet schematics in *Eri*'s
historical archive, *Araneus* kept a forest behind that hatch. Back when
it shipped out, at least.

Now, who knows?

A long, low whistle from Solway. "Will you look at that."

The image still isn't great. But it's clearer than it was, even if bits
of dark static persist along certain features. Around the edges of the
hatch, for example. Along the seams.

Of course, if that *was* static Chimp would've cleaned it up along with
everything else. So those dark streaks are real.

Scoring. Scorch marks.

This door wasn't sealed by time and space. It was sealed by lasers and
acetylene.

This thing is a *barricade*.

Heinwald sighs.

He won't be getting back to oblivion any time soon.

### \* \* \*

Chimp printed a diving bell while they wondered and quailed: a magical
contraption of graphene and ceramic and programmable matter not so much
built as *spun*. It carries three 'spores—each cocooned in its own suit
of armor—and three beetle-shelled bots in its belly. The shuttle births
through one of the Von tubes and Chimp remote-pilots it in a slow mad
tumble: all arcs and conics and off-center pirouettes, a trajectory from
a stable decelerating mass to a coasting eccentric one, the speck
between doing its best to segue smoothly from one to the other.
*Araneus* swells ahead like a black thunderhead, a vast dark mountain
rolling through the cosmos. By the time the bell brushes up against one
of its docking ports, it blacks out half the sky.

The hatch is vacuum-welded. They burn through and open a hole into a
deeper airless darkness that surrenders to radar and the sweep of
headlights: a prep compartment, suits still hanging in alcoves, hand
tools and EVA prosthetics arrayed neatly on their racks. If not for the
vacuum you could almost expect the lights to come on, some fresh-faced
complement of 'spores to round the corner and welcome you aboard.

At the far end of the compartment, the inner hatch gapes.

Heinwald goes through the motions, finds a power coupling, runs a line,
reports back: "Nothing." Solway grunts. Vrooman doesn't even do that.
They're both busy lugging pieces of taxicart from shuttle to corridor.
The components are prefab and lightweight—and the grav's barely
point-two gees here anyway—but there's still something vaguely comical
about the two 'spores bearing such outsized burdens on their shoulders.
Ants in spacesuits, carrying ten times their weight without a second
thought.

Heinwald moves into the corridor and starts putting the cart together
while the others hump a three-bottle O₂ cascade in from the shuttle.
Once assembled, the cart's designed to fit through any opening at least
as wide as a standard dropgate. It can be taken apart in a snap, should
it be necessary to portage through rougher terrain—a safe bet, based on
advance intelligence.

The corridor fades to black in either direction. Solway, on Nav, checks
her map for last-second updates and points right. "That way."

They climb into their saddles; Vrooman in the driver's seat up front,
Solway and Heinwald behind and to either side. The cart's headlight
flares to life, illuminates an unremarkable strip of deck angling left
and ever so slightly down. The bots rise into standard escort formation:
one ahead, one behind, one waiting off their shoulder to move in and
take the place of whoever dies first. Solway watches them line up, turns
to Heinwald, her face half-masked by the reflection of his faceplate in
hers.

No sound but breathing.

They head out.

### \* \* \*

They lose the first bot ten klicks in, around the point-four isograv.

They're taking a breather after a slip fracture that snapped the passage
like a broken spine and pushed the deeper segment two meters to the
right. It's taken them over two kilosecs to clear the rubble from the
small gap that remains, break down the cart, ferry the pieces through,
and reassemble them on the other side. Comms is still echoing with
helmet breath when Heinwald sends Point Bot on ahead to scope out the
terrain. The drone floats serenely forward, disappears into the darkness
around a corner. Ten seconds later a flash of blinding light spikes
across Heinwald's faceplate and the channel goes dead.

"Hey, did anyone see—?" Vrooman was looking forward. "Something lit up
the corridor down there…"

They creep forward. Eventually it comes into view around the bend: a
rent in the bulkhead, a junction box, torn open no doubt by the same
seismic shift that split the passage behind them. Blue lightning sparks
fitfully in the wound, soft, silent, almost *pretty*. Point Bot's
carcass lies on its back like a great charred beetle a few meters
further along the deck.

"Must've got too close," Vrooman says. "Arced."

Heinwald looks back over his shoulder, where Solway has been wisely
keeping a safer distance. "Sierra. Any other way in?"

"Not on the map. Map's full of holes, of course; you wanna backtrack,
we're gonna have to start going down blind alleys and hope we get lucky.
Or go back the surface and see if Chimp's got any updates for us."

"Our suits are shielded," Vrooman points out. "Nothing exposed but
ceramic and plastic, once we zip up the antennae." Which is true enough;
their attire doesn't have any of those messy ground-effect plates that
make bots so vulnerable to ambient electricity.

Still…

"We'll have to bag all the the electricals on the cart."

"Don't really need them anyway," Solway points out. "We could pedal the
rest of the way."

"Riiight." Heinwald can hear the eye-roll in Vrooman's voice.

"Only another thirty kliks or so. You got something against a little
exercise?"

"When it eats into our O₂ supply, damn right I do."

"Look, it's simple enough," Heinwald says. "We either go on, go back, or
wander around blindly in unmapped territory hoping for another way in.
You want to run through our O₂, that's the way to do it."

They ditch one of the surviving bots in deference to the cart's limited
carrying capacity, leave it powered down to await their return. They bag
the other and strap it onto the cart. The cart itself is mostly plastic,
designed with an eye to energetically-volatile environments; it's a
simple matter to strip out its rudimentary electronics and dump them
into Faraday bags along with anything else that can carry a charge. They
tamp down and zip up every conductor on their own suits, and—still
vulnerable to old-fashioned mammalian superstition—press up against the
far side of the corridor as they creep past those torn sparking cables,
both pushing the decorticated cart and hiding behind it.

They make it past without incident. Of course, with no bot running
point, the next loose wire could still fry the vehicle and anyone along
for the ride. So Vrooman relents; they agree to leave the cart without a
nervous system, resort to mechanical backups and just pedal the damn
thing like Victorians from a historical novel. They keep their antennae
down and communicate using hand gestures—or, when necessary, by the
age-old fallback of pressing their helmets together. Mostly, though,
they don't talk at all. They creep quietly through the guts of this dead
airless wreck as though afraid of some predator hiding in the dark,
still holding its breath after five million years.

They cross chasms. They tunnel through cave-ins. They follow Solway's
piecemeal map down the well, gaining weight with every meter. They come
across a dead bot—quite possibly the one that lured them here with its
last cry—wedged between a coolant pipe and a long-dead roach fused to
the deck: downed, apparently, by some transient EMP that came and went
and left no trace. Heinwald keeps one worried eye on the cart's O₂
cascade, cringes inwardly whenever someone bleeds down the pressure to
replenish a suit tank. He's half-convinced they're burning through their
air too fast, that they'll be well into the bottom half before they even
reach their destination.

Finally they turn one last corner and there it is: a great ridged frame
embedded in rough-hewn basalt; a great biosteel slab embedded in the
frame. Their headlamps send bright ovals sliding every which way across
every surface, fractal bedrock, Euclidean alloy.

*About fucking time*, Solway mouths. Heinwald checks the cascade and
relaxes a little.

Sixty-three percent remaining.

### \* \* \*

No naked circuits that anyone can see. No rad fields or frayed
capacitors primed to discharge without warning. It's safe to break out
the electronics, which is just as well: that hatch isn't going to breach
itself.

Antennae emerge from protective envelopes. Comms crackle back to life.
Vrooman leans up against the barrier, runs a gloved hand along a
puckered metal scar. "Definitely welded. Someone keeping something in,
or someone keeping something out."

"I'm guessing that first thing," Solway hazards. "Given that it's welded
from the outside and all."

"Bot could've done it. Could be welded from both sides for good
measure."

*Maybe it was a mutiny*, Heinwald thinks. *Maybe they rose up, and their
Chimp came down hard, and this was their last stand…*

Vrooman breaks out the torch. Solway unbags their last bot and wakes it
up. Heinwald unpacks a microseismometer and plants it onto the metal,
calibrates it for the thickness of the hatch and sets a ten-second
countdown. Everyone stands back and stands still; the device is pretty
good at compensating for ambient vibrations, but there's no point in
making it work any harder than it has to. At T=0 it begins drumming its
fingers, *fast*: sixteen little pile-drivers arrayed in a grid, a
multibarreled bolt gun hammering on the metal hard enough to deafen if
there were any air to carry sound. As it is, the assault is a silent,
rapid-fire blur.

It ends as quickly as it began. All those lightning-fast fingers just
*stop* in the same instant, some still pressed against the alloy, others
raised and poised for another strike. The microseismometer reads the
echoes, thinks for a moment, serves up a verdict.

Heinwald reads it. "Positive pressure."

"Shit, really?" Vrooman leans in to see for himself.

"Couple hundred Pascals. Pretty close to vacuum. But not quite."

"Must've been a lot thicker when they sealed it up," Solway surmises.
"Probably just—seeped away through the rocks or something in the
meantime."

"At least we don't have to worry about anything breathing on the other
side." Absurdly, Heinwald feels a kind of relief at the thought. He's
not sure why: *of course there's nothing breathing on the other side,
you idiot. It's been terasecs. There wouldn't be anything breathing in
there even if there were anything left to breathe.*

Vrooman fires up the torch and sketches a slow circular track, burning
at an oblique angle to carve out a conic—small opening on this side,
wide on the other—so the excised plug will slide back and out of the way
instead of just sitting there like a lump. It's slow going. The hatch is
deep and dense, and the torch's fuel cells are built for efficiency over
output. It takes almost a kilosec before Vrooman closes the circle and
the metal within falls away. A two-meter hole gapes in the center of the
hatch, a dark portal limned by a thin crescent highlight glowing white
where the beam last touched. The merest whiff of vapor appears in their
headlamps and vanishes in an instant.

The metal cools to red, to dull dark gunmetal. Solway sends the bot
through. Intel begins scrolling across Heinwald's faceplate: radar and
thermal, slices of light and shadow as the bot pans the near interior.

Twisted shapes. Trees and teeth and empty staring sockets of bone.

"*Fuuuuck*," Solway murmurs. Vrooman doesn't speak; the hiss of breath
across his teeth says enough.

Heinwald keeps a queasy silence. These glimpses of a forest once
inhabited, of a forest *inhabitant*, hit a bit too close to home.

They stand without speaking for a few moments. Finally, Solway climbs
through. Vrooman follows. Heinwald, hanging back, almost gets the sense
that they're forcing themselves: that curiosity has given way to
apprehension, that they no longer proceed from desire but from sheer
grim force of will. That freed of all duty-bound constraints, they'd
just as soon turn back and leave this cavern to its secrets.

Maybe he's just projecting.

The darkness in the tunnel presses closer; Heinwald's lone headlamp is
too weak to keep it at bay. He takes a breath and bends down, climbs
into the breach, crabwalks the meter to the other side. Vrooman and
Solway's beams fence with each other in the gloom beyond. They make no
mention of past reminders or leaning glades. They do not speak at all.

*Surely they would, though. If they knew. Surely this would remind
them.*

He emerges into a vast dim mausoleum. Three pools of sharp-edged light
slide across cracks and ledges in the near distance; the cavern's upper
reaches are lost in shadow. Monstrous boles rise from one into the
other: roots as thick as thighs, dead twisted trunks that split and
branch and fuse together again.

Vrooman pans his headlamp up the nearest monstrosity as Heinwald catches
up. (Solway's already forging further ahead.) "That's not like any
shipboard plant *I've* ever seen."

"Some kind of mutation," Solway suggests.

Heinwald shakes his head. "Engineering. They had to amp up
photosynthesis. Usual ecosystem wouldn't keep them breathing for long."

"They'd have needed a big honking light source."

"They probably had one. To start with."

They.

He glances down, despite himself. Steels himself as his headlamp moves,
almost of its own volition, to settle on that small shocking thing the
bot showed them when it passed this way. One of *them*: skeletal,
crystalline, arched and twisted across a basalt outcropping. Heinwald
kneels, lays a gloved hand against a femur. It doesn't budge. He pushes,
gently. Less gently. Nothing. The bone and the bedrock have fused, the
skeleton gone to mineral.

Vrooman's at his side. "You're saying they lived here."

"I'm saying they tried to."

"That's insane."

No hint of precedent. No indication, here in the wreckage of one vessel,
that they've heard of the misdeeds that nearly wrecked their own. The
small knot in Heinwald's gut—a knot, he realizes now, that's been
clenched ever since he first met these two—eases a little.

"I'm not suggesting they had a choice," he says. "Or even that it
worked."

"It worked for a while," Solway calls back. "You guys should get over
here."

They abandon the fossil and follow in her footsteps. Heinwald grabs
feeds: Solway's visual from up ahead, the bot's radar from even further.
Shapes grow in his HUD, ragged bits and pieces that somehow cohere into
structure: things glimpsed piecemeal in the gaps between trees, things
built *out* of trees, things grafted against trunks or secured in the
forks of branches or just standing unsupported on the ground. Wide-eye
windows and gap-mouth doorways and thatched roofs older than species,
sitting endlessly patient in the dark and the cold. Seeing light for the
first time in aeons.

"Why would they build roofs?" Vrooman wonders softly. "It's not like
they had to keep out the rain. Nothing but rock up there."

"Maybe that's what they wanted to keep out." Heinwald closes his eyes,
imagines a life so constrained that you have to block the view just to
imagine a sky overhead.

"What?"

"Nothing."

The three of them spread out, their beams dividing the darkness. Vrooman
finds a fire pit. Solway discovers a depression in the rock, rimmed with
hand-chipped bricks, that looks like it might have been some kind of
cistern. Heinwald's headlamp plays over a patch of squat fossilized
lumps, vaguely organic, planted in rows.

This far in, none of them can venture more than a few steps without
tripping over sticks and stones with arms and legs.

"Twenty-five kliks from a displacement drive," Solway murmurs invisibly
from some hut across the village square. "Less than a day's walk from a
tame singularity. And they were living in the Middle Ages."

"It doesn't add up," Vrooman says.

"Adds up to me," Heinwald tells him. "Something cracked *Araneus* like a
walnut and they ended up here. Last airtight pocket on the whole rock,
maybe. Only one they could get to, at least."

"This forest couldn't have provided oxygen for more than three people,
tops."

"They overclocked the flora."

"Something did. But that took a lot longer than these people would have
had before they suffocated."

Solway's beam reappears around some corner, bobs through the void toward
them as she chimes in: "There'd only be a few 'spores on deck anyway,
any given time."

"Normally. You're saying this was normal?"

"Maybe—" Vrooman hesitates. "Maybe whatever happened here, maybe they
saw it coming. Had time to prepare."

"Or maybe they didn't," Solway says, rejoining them, "and they just
started with what they had on hand." She raises her hands, brings the
thing she's holding into the light.

A tiny human rib cage.

Heinwald hasn't seen a real child since he *was* one, but these bones
couldn't have been more than four or five when the flesh around them
cashed in.

Solway drops them. They shatter in silence, fragile as crystal.

"They *bred*?" Vrooman whispers in disbelief.

"It's what people do," Solway reminds them.

"It's what people *did*, and look where it got them." Vrooman sounds
personally offended. "They fucked up a whole damn *planet* with their
breeding. Why in God's name would anyone do that in a *cave*? *How*
could they do it, even?"

He's got a point. Spores can't breed. UNDA considered that option,
certainly: send out ships with smaller rosters, let them make up the
difference by pumping out replacements en route. But the costs were too
great. All those perfectly balanced genotypes, optimized for exile:
diluted, shuffled, degraded with each new generation. The drip-drip-drip
of cultural entropy, the erosion of vocational training by forgetful
teachers and indifferent students and the inevitable drift of priorities
down through time. Not to mention the strain of a fluctuating population
on finely tuned life-support systems. Once you factored in all the costs
and benefits, it just made more sense to invest everything up front,
train the whole damn crew right from the start, dole them out as the
universe ran down.

So 'spores don't breed. Officially. But Heinwald has always suspected
that that particular switch might be flipped on again, under the right
circumstances. In the event of some apocalypse that wiped out most of a
standing crew, growing one back from scratch might be the only
alternative to mission failure.

An apocalypse like this one. Whatever this is. Solway's discovery is
fairly telling as circumstantial evidence goes.

Heinwald looks around with new eyes, his headlamp painting the walls and
windows and facades of this half-assed troglodyte civilization. "How
long?" he whispers, awestruck. "How long did this place last?"

"Maybe right up until their sun broke," Solway says. "Maybe until they
inbred themselves to death."

Centuries, maybe. Millennia. Hundreds, maybe thousands were born, lived
out their lives, died in this tiny bubble in the rock. A stagnant relic
of Humanity, buried alive between the stars.

*This was everything to them*. He feels a little sick inside. *Their
whole universe was eight hundred meters across…*

"—have to find the other crypts," Solway's saying. "All of them."

"Sol, the whole grid's fucked," Vrooman says gently. "It's been fucked
for terasecs. Even if we had a hope in hell of getting to them, you want
to guess the odds that any crypt on this wreck never suffered a single
power failure during—"

"I dunno, Ari. What are the odds that a bunch of 'spores in a cave could
stay alive for centuries using stone tools and spit?" She waves an arm,
takes in the whole dark tableaux. "*This* is what's impossible. These
people didn't just run in here and start building huts. They
re-engineered their whole damn ecosystem. That took time. If they had
time to do that here, someone somewhere else could've had time to rig a
few coffins for long-term standalone operation."

*If you only knew*, Heinwald thinks, pathetically relieved that she
doesn't.

"There could be others still alive," Solway says.

"There aren't," something whispers.

Heinwald frowns. "Ari? Was—"

"Wasn't me," Vrooman says.

"I've been over every square meter of this rock a thousand times," the
voice continues. "I've had a hundred fifty terasecs to look. No one made
it."

It trails off, thin as a dying breeze. Every hair on Heinwald's body
stands to attention.

He checks comms. Whatever it is, it's using their regular voice channel.

"*You* made it," Solway says softly. "Whatever you are."

"Yes." Toneless, asexual. Somehow organic, though. Somehow—alive…

"What are you?" Vrooman asks. "Is this *Araneus*? Are we speaking to—"

"I'm just a, a hitchhiker."

"Hitchhiker."

"Maybe *tourist* would be a better word. This isn't my first language."
A soft hiss: a pop of static, a carrier wave. "I would have come by
sooner, but it took me a while to wake up. Things move so slowly out
here…"

Three headlamps, one bot, panning back and forth in the darkness:
seeking some kind of telltale motion but only making their own as
shadows grow and leap and dwindle in the sweep of their beams.

"Where are you?" Solway demands. Heinwald's impressed despite himself;
he can barely hear the quaver in her voice.

"I'm just outside." Wind through reeds, through glass pipes; sadness,
somehow. "They never let me in."

"Show yourself!" Vrooman cries and Heinwald thinks *No, don't. Stay
hidden, stay out, leave us alone, go away go away go away*— but it's not
going away. It's coming in through the entrance they made for it, hatch
must be sixty meters back but still their lights pick out that shadow
curling in through the hole. Heinwald can see wispy attenuate limbs
snaking into view and pulling a body after it, he can see the whole
obscene spectral mass clamber across the face of the hatch and up into
shadows where rocks and fossil trees and occasional protrusions of dead
machinery block the view no matter how hard he cranks the zoom, no
matter what wavelengths he uses to pierce the darkness.

Doesn't matter, though. He saw enough in transit: the ring of eyes,
those raked pulsing *cuts* (gills? What possible use could gills be
here?) along an undulating boneless thorax. Appendages that seem utterly
wrong in both form and number, although now—mere moments later—he's at a
loss to remember exactly how.

Naked, though. He remembers that much. No suit, no protection from the
vacuum and the cold.

In here with them, now.

"Well, Ari"—Solway spares a sideways glance at Vrooman—"you always
wanted to meet an alien."

Vrooman says nothing. Heinwald says nothing. On comms, a hiss of static
modulates and flexes and somehow conveys a sense of laughter.

"Whatever gave you that idea? I'm more human that you are.

"I'm more human than you've been for sixty-eight million years."

\
\

(...To be continued)
